Wolf, Ruben, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Hello.
Thanks for having me.
Yeah, it's great to have you here.
We're going to dive into packaging once again.
And we've talked about packaging a couple times over the last few months.
It's a super interesting topic.
And there are these times where it seems like there's a fixed way and everyone kind of agrees
like this is how you do things.
For example, I think Flask and Django
have kind of been web frameworks for a long time.
Then all of a sudden, a thousand flowers bloom
and there's a bunch of new ideas.
In the web space, I think that was driven by async
and the typing stuff.
And a bunch of people said, well, let's try new things
now that we have these new ideas.
And the other frameworks were more stable,
couldn't make those adjustments.
And I think people are just, you know,
we're kind of at one of these explosion points
of different ideas and different experiments.
in packaging? What do you all think?
Yeah, I think that's an interesting way to put it.
I think we definitely see a lot of interest
in package management these days
and new ideas being explored.
But I also think that we're definitely standing
on the shoulders of giants,
so kind of similar to what you just described
with the web frameworks,
where actually I think we are taking a lot of inspiration
from multiple different ecosystems that are out there
and try to kind of synthesize the best ideas into our tools.
Yeah, you got some interesting ideas for sure.
Ruben?
I cannot really add to that anymore.
I'm standing on the shoulders of giants like Wolf.
Yeah, absolutely.
I think we'll go into that.
Yeah, we sure will.
Now, before we get into the topics,
let's just do a quick introduction for folks who don't know you.
I feel like this is a really interesting coincidence
because the very last previous show that I did was with Sylvan and Jeremy, a bunch of
folks from Quantstack.
Nice.
And, you know, just out of coincidence, like I said, you're colleagues, right?
So, Wolf, let's start with you.
A little background on you.
So, yeah.
So I did work at Quantstack for quite a while.
And it's also where my journey with package management began.
maybe just taking one more step back.
I studied in Zurich
and I actually graduated in robotics there
with a master's degree.
And yeah.
That's awesome.
I had some fun times.
I was also working with Disney Research
on like a little robot
that was drawing images in the sand
and these kind of fun things.
But at Quantstack,
we were doing a lot of scientific computing stuff
initially trying to like re-implement NumPy in C++ which is a library called Xtensor
and always doing a lot of package management and mostly in the
CondaForge and Conda ecosystem and Conda at some point became really slow and CondaForge became
really large and that led me to kind of experiment with new things which resulted in Mamba
and then I got really lucky and had the opportunity to create my own little startup around more of
these package management ideas which is the current company called Prefix and we'll dive
more into Pixie and all these new things that we're doing I think later on. Yeah that's a lot
of interesting stuff. What language do you program a robot that writes in the sand in?
It's always a mix of Python and C++.
So I think I stuck to that up until now.
Yeah, yeah, it sounds like it.
Ruben, what's your story?
Tell people a bit about yourself.
Yeah, so I also started in robotics.
I did a Megatronics Engineering degree.
And while working in robotics,
I started at my previous company, Smart Robotics.
And there we were building the new modern AI-driven robots.
So that also involves a lot of deep learning packages and stuff like that.
And that is kind of how I got into these package management solutions.
And we started using Comba to package our C++ and our Python stuff
and to make it easy to use in these virtual environments
where we combine those packages.
And it all was made easier by Mamba, which was built by Wolf.
So that's how we got in touch.
And later on, I moved to Fool's company.
So that's why I'm here now.
Excellent.
So you're a prefix dev as well?
Yes.
Awesome.
I'm an extra dev there, yep.
Cool.
Well, I guess let's start with a little bit of maybe setting the stage.
So you all talked about Conda and Conda Forge and really relying on that for a while.
And then wanting better performance, some other features we're going to talk about as well.
But give us a quick background for those maybe non-data scientists or people who are not super into it.
What is Conda and what is Conda Forge and the relationship of those things?
Who wants to take that?
Yeah.
So Conda is, generally speaking, a package manager.
That's all it is.
It actually has nothing specific to AI, ML, data science, etc.
But most people associate it with Python and machine learning, let's say.
And Conda is written in Python and it's like, I don't know, 10 or 15 years old.
And it kind of comes out of an era where there were no wheel files on PyPI
and people had to compile stuff on their own machines.
You can't use this. Where's your Fortran compiler? Come on. You're like, what? What year is this again?
And you need your GCC, et cetera. So that's kind of when Conda was born. And I think it really
was one of those early tools that tried something with binary package management cross-platform.
So basically, Conda allowed you to install Python and a bunch of Python packages that needed compiled extensions like NumPy, SciPy, etc.
And it kind of comes out of this Travis Oliphant universe of scientific Python tools.
Yeah, he's made a huge impact for sure.
Yeah. But for us, sort of, the key feature is just that it's like a cross-platform generic package manager that you can actually use for any language. So you can also create Kona packages for R. And there are actually quite a few R packages on KonaFort, let's say. And you can also do Julia or Rust, etc. So there's a lot of possibility and potential.
And I think it also kind of hits a sweet spot where Conda is really not a language-specific package manager.
And it's at the same time cross-platform.
Because usually what you have is you have either some sort of Windows package manager or Linux package manager like apt-get or DNF on Fedora.
Or you have a language-specific package manager like pip or Julia has package.jl or R has crann, etc.
and so conda kind of sits uh at the crossroads of those two where it's not language specific
and also cross platform and i think that makes it uh like really interesting and then maybe i can
also uh talk a little bit about conda forge because i think that's the other really impactful part
about the conda universe where conda forge is really a group of i think over 5 000 individual
people that are building packages in GitHub repositories.
And each of those repositories basically builds a recipe on a CI system that then kind of results
in the artifact, which is a Conva package that you can install.
And so all of the packages on ConvaForge are built on CI systems.
And most of them are cross-platform available.
So you have them for Windows, macOS, and Linux.
And those packages are like all the low-level stuff.
Like usually Conda starts at the glibc level, let's say.
So glibc is like that fundamental library
that we need to get from the operating system.
And on Windows and macOS,
there's like an SDK and other like DLS
that we need from the operating system.
But everything above is like managed by Conda
or Mamba or Pixie.
So all of these tools work on the base of the same packages.
And that starts at like Bzip2 or Zlib,
like these low level compression libraries,
OpenSSL, and then up to Python.
And then you can also get Qt,
which is a graphical user interface library,
which is written in C++.
And applications that are building on top of Qt,
so like for example, physics simulation engines
and stuff like this.
And you also get Qt and lots of libraries like this.
And all is not bound to a specific operating system
in that sense.
And that makes it pretty nice.
For example, also in CI, when you want to test your own software
and stuff like this, you can use the same commands
to set up basically the same packages across different platforms.
Yeah, nice.
And so kind of like what Wheels did for pip and PyPI,
Kondo was way ahead of that game, right?
But with a harder challenge because it wasn't just Python packages.
It was all these different ones, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, including Python itself.
So that's also one of the things that people sometimes maybe not realize.
But Python itself is actually properly packaged on CondaForge
and installable via Conda or Mamba or Pixie.
Excellent.
Ruben, anything you want to add to that before we start talking about what you all are creating?
Yeah, so from my history, it's like this multi-platform stuff is less used in robotics
because a lot of the stuff is still running in Linux, but it moved it from the ability to
run it only on Ubuntu to, yeah, any version you want. And you could install any version of the
robotic software you're running on, like, any version of Ubuntu. So where we were locked,
not just to Linux, but logged to a distribution of Linux. We are now completely unbound and the
developers can set up their own environments, which is just really powerful for the user itself.
And that brought it back into our company in a much better way.
Yeah, that's excellent. I'm always blown away at how much traffic these package managers have,
how much bandwidth they use and things like that.
Who's hosting Conda Forge and where you get that stuff from?
Currently, Conda Forge is entirely hosted by anaconda.org.
We do have a couple of mirrors available, but they are not really used. One of the more exciting
mirrors that we have is on GitHub itself. GitHub has this GitHub packages feature and
we are using an OCI registry where you would usually put your Docker containers and stuff like
that. We upload all the content packages there just as a backup. And we're planning to make it
usable as well. So that would be nice for your own GitHub actions and stuff because they could just
take the packet from GitHub internally. Right. Just write down the server rack in the data center.
Yeah, exactly. Keep it local. It's always good to be local.
Cool.
- Yep.
- Okay, cool.
So let's, I wanna focus mostly on Pixie for our conversation
because I think that's got a lot of excitement.
Maybe we'll get some time to talk about Mamba
and other things as well.
But yeah, let's, you all wrote this interesting announcement
entitled Let's Stop Dependency Hell,
talking about Pixie here.
And so it's, I think we can sort of talk through some
the ideas you laid out there and that'll give people a good idea of what this is all about.
Yeah.
Yeah. So first of all, let's start with some of the problems you're trying to solve here. So
say we've all experienced issues with reproducibility and dependency management.
I will tell you just yesterday, and if it was later in the day for me, it would probably be today.
I'm running into a problem where with my courses website, where I try to install both the developer
dependencies and the production dependencies. And it's like, this one requires greater than
this dependency. And this one requires less than that dependency. You can't install it. I'm like,
well, how am I supposed to do this? Like, I'd rather have it shaky than impossible. So,
So, you know, it's dependency challenges are all too present for me.
But yeah, maybe you can lay out some of the ideas,
like what you had in mind when you're talking about reproducibility and challenges here.
Yeah, I think you're not alone, first of all.
So a lot of people have these kind of problems.
And it's also not only in the Python world, let's say.
But I think it's maybe a bit more pronounced in the Python world
just because there are so many packages and the way that package management in the Python
world works.
Yeah, I feel like we can always look over at the JavaScript.
People feel a little bit better, but it's still a challenge for us.
That's true, yeah.
So, well, we are, with Pixie, just to take one step back, so we kind of started to, again,
rewrite the entirety of, like, how you manage Conda packages.
with Pixie or with the lower level tools that we're using in Pixie, which are called,
it's like a set of crates that is under the Rattler repository.
And those are like, I don't know, eight or nine crates that basically do everything from like
fetching the package, resolving the versions that you want to have,
reading the metadata from the packages and linking it into the virtual environment,
because we're creating these virtual environments on the hard drive,
and we have a central cache and things like this.
And so Rattler is kind of the low-level tools that take care of all of this,
and it's written more or less from scratch in Rust.
I mean, obviously, we're reusing a lot of the nice things
that we found in the Rust ecosystem,
so there are many very useful crates.
But, yeah, basically, that's sort of the bottom-line thing that we're doing.
And what's also nice about it is that we are spinning off multiple things from the same set of crates.
So it's not only Pixie.
There's also one thing called Rattler build, which is actually building the conda packages.
And then we have the back end of our website, prefix.dev, which is also written in Rust and also uses Rattler underneath.
So that's really nice for us.
So maybe if I was, if I wanted to stick with, say, Conda, could I still use Rattler build and then somehow upload that to Conda Forge along those lines?
Yeah.
Okay.
You can totally, like, that's kind of the baseline sort of commonality between all of these tools is that we are sharing the same sort of Conda packages and the same metadata.
and like, yeah, we definitely want to be 100% compatible package-wise with Konda for now.
Excellent.
We might have features later on, but we want to go through,
like Konda as a project has also become much more community-oriented
and there's like a process called Konda Enhancement Proposals
and we have already written a few of those.
So there are many ideas, but we can talk about that later.
Yeah, trying to improve the overall system instead of overthrow it.
Yes, yes.
Yeah, like we would love to like improve the entirety of like Condor packages, Condor Forge and all of this.
Like that's our main dream.
But yeah, so and then with some of the low-level tools in Redline with Pixie,
we're kind of combining a bunch of tools that already existed.
And one thing essential for reproducibility is that you have log files.
So at the point where you are sort of resolving your dependencies,
we are also writing them into a log file.
And that's like something known from poetry, from NPM, Yarn.
Cargo also has it.
And there's also a Conda project that's called CondaLock that writes log files.
And so we have adopted the same format that CondaLock uses,
which is a YAML-based log file format.
and implemented in Rattler and we are exposing it and using it in Pixie.
So anytime you add a new dependency to your project, we write it in a log file
and we make sure that you can install the same packages,
the same set of packages, the same versions and char hashes in the future.
And the other part about reproducibility, and that's more on the repository side,
is that Conda Forge never deletes old packages.
So that's similar to PyPI, but not really.
It's different in a lot of Linux distributions.
But with PyPI, it's also the case that old versions
are just kept around.
Do you ever worry that that might not be sustainable?
Like, it's fine now.
In 20 years, we cannot pay for the thing from 20 years.
We just can't get enough donations to support Flask 0.1.
We just can't.
It's out.
I mean, sure.
Like, that's the problem of the person that uses Flask 0.1, right?
That's not the problem of the repository.
I think we're just making sure that you could still run it,
and you should probably sandbox it like crazy
so that there are no, like, zero days that could affect your system.
Well, also, you do have some things that are self-hosted
Conda capabilities that maybe we'll get a chance to talk about.
Theoretically, you could download these
and save as a company or an organization or a researcher.
You could get the ones that actually count for you, right?
Yeah.
Like, you mean only have a subset of the packages that you need?
Yeah, say I'm using 50 packages
with the transitive closure of everything I'm using.
So I'm just going to make sure I have every version of those on Dropbox or on a hard drive I put away somewhere.
Yeah.
It's actually pretty funny because what you create on your local system is a cache of all the packages that you ever used.
And you could activate that cache as a channel, like what Condor Forge is.
You could make your own channel of all your packages locally.
This is something we used when the internet went down in our company.
And we still needed to share packages with each other.
to make our environments and just some people would spin up their own channel and you could
use it from there it's just a different oh awesome yeah yeah that's awesome
cool i derailed your your uh there well no but yeah i think like log files are the basis for
reproducibility and then the fact that packages are never deleted. And I think that's something
that log files make it look a little bit like a Docker container, sort of. Because you know
exactly what's in your software environment. We don't control the outside and we don't do sandboxing
as of now. But that's kind of the way we think about log files and it just makes it very convenient
also to ship basically that log file plus the pixie tommel and stuff to your co-worker and they
can just run it and we also resolve for multiple operating systems at the same time. So you can
say you can specify in your pixie tommel if you want Linux, macOS and Windows and we resolve
everything at the same time in parallel with async Rust code and stuff like this.
Nice. So it's pretty fast and nice. And yeah, the idea is that you can send it to
your co-worker. They can just do a Pixie run start, which would just give them
everything they need and have them up and going. Yeah, really cool. So in your
announcement for Pixie, one of the things you said is you're looking for the
convenience of modern package managers such as cargo what's different than say
pip and pypi versus cargo like when you say that what are these new features
you're like I wish we had this already we don't so I'm gonna build it so with I
I think one thing that's just really nice with cargo is, and that also attracts so many contributors to Rust Project, at least, like that's the way I feel about it, is that it's so easy to just say cargo, run, whatever.
And it most of the time works and you just do cargo build and like it builds.
And that's the experience that we want to recreate with Pixie.
And Cargo also comes with log files.
And Cargo just does this pretty nicely.
I mean, there are some peculiarities about how Rust builds packages or thinks about dependencies,
where the result is pretty different, let's say, from like Python ecosystem and stuff like this.
But the baseline experience is definitely what we're also striving for.
And part of the problem is maybe also that pip is not managing Python.
So you always have a little bit of that chicken and egg problem where you need to get Python first to be able to run pip.
And with Pixie, you don't have that problem because we also manage Python.
So you can specify in your Pixie terminal what version of Python you want.
You get it on Windows, macOS, and Linux in the same way.
And everything is just one command.
And everything is also locked in your log file, etc.
So that's kind of, yeah, we just control a bit more than pip.
and I think that's
what's giving us some power and then pip also
as far as I'm aware and we recently had discussions with
Python
package management developers
they haven't come up with a log file format that works for everyone yet
so Poetry has their own implementation
and a bunch of other tools maybe have their own
right there's the pip lock from pipenv and others
right yeah
Yeah. But yeah, so we're also kind of working on that. I don't know if you saw that, but we just
announced another tool that's also low level, sort of on the same level as Rattler, but it's called
RIP. And it deals with Python resolving and wheel files. And so we want to kind of cross over those
two worlds where we resolve the counter packages first, then we resolve the Python packages after,
and we stick everything into the same log file.
That will for now be similar to the, yeah,
basically based on the conda log format,
which is a YAML file.
Interesting.
So this rip, I'm familiar with it.
I didn't necessarily in my mind tie it back to Pixie.
But would that allow you to, could you mix and match?
Like some stuff comes off conda forwards
and some stuff comes off of PyPI,
but you express that in your dependency file?
Yeah.
Like, parts of the semantics aren't yet figured out, let's say.
But the idea is definitely that you can install Python and NumPy, for example, from Conda
Forge.
And then, I don't know, scikit-learn from PyPI.
Wow.
Like, that's maybe not the example of how you would use it, but--
Yeah, of course.
Right.
Maybe you do one of the web frameworks, right?
Like FastAPI versus some of the scientific stuff from Conda.
Yeah.
Yeah, I find at least the official Conda stuff.
Sometimes certain frameworks are a little bit behind,
and there are situations where having the latest one
within an hour matters a lot.
For example, hey, it turns out, theoretically it's not real,
it turns out that, say, Flask has a super bad
remote code execution problem.
We just found out that if you send a cat emoji
as part of the URL, it's all over.
So patch it now, right?
You don't want to wait for that to slowly get through
You need that now, right?
And PyPI, I find, is kind of the tip of the latest in that regard.
Yeah.
So I do agree to some extent.
So it's like we also found that a lot of there are these no arch packages, like pure Python packages.
And I think there's just way more packages on PyPI.
And the turn of managing that on KonaForge is a bit high.
So that's also like, we have lots of reasons and also in real world examples,
we often find people mixing PyPI, pip and Conda.
So that's why we're thinking like we need proper sort of support for
PyPI in our tool to make it really nice for Python developers.
Yeah, it would take it to another level for sure.
And it would certainly make it stand out from what Conda does
or what pip does, honestly.
Yeah. And like Conda, for example, there is a way to kind of like add
some Python dependencies, but it's really just invoking pip as a sub-process and then installing
some additional stuff into your environment.
And it's not really nice, not really tightly integrated.
And so we actually kind of did the work and wrote a resolver in Rust, so SAT solver.
And we've just extended it to also deal with Python or PyPI metadata, which is kind of
what RIP is.
Yeah.
So that's going to be very interesting to figure out
how to integrate those things and really make them work
nicely together.
Yeah.
I want to talk about the ergonomics using Pixie.
But first, Baby Ruben, you could address this first.
But I opened this whole conversation
with 1,000 flowers blooming around the package management
story.
And I think for a long time, what people had seen
was they're going to try to innovate within Python.
So you install Python, you create your environment,
and then you have a different workflow with different tools.
But some of the new ideas are starting to move to the outside.
We'll also manage Python itself.
If you say you want Python 3.10 and you only have 3.11 installed,
we'll take care of that.
And something built on Python has a real hard time installing Python
because there's this chicken and egg probably needs it first, right?
And it sounds like you all are taking that approach of
we're going to be outside of Python, built in Rust,
or any binary that just runs on its own would work.
To have a greater control, right?
So, yeah, what are your thoughts on that?
Yeah, so one of the strong points is that you can install it as a standalone binary.
So you have a simple script or you can even just download it
and put it in your machine, and then you can install whatever you want.
So you're not limited to Python alone.
And in a lot of cases, you want to mix a lot of stuff.
Sometimes you need a specific version of SSH,
or sometimes you need a specific version of OpenSSL,
or whatever that needs your package.
And you would have these long lists of getting started to like,
oh, you need to install this with apt,
or you need to install this with name anything,
any other package manager.
And then you can run pip install,
and then it should all work.
And Pixie kind of moves that back to,
you have to have Pixie,
and you have to have the source code
of the package that you're running,
or you're directly using Pixie to install something.
And you're most of the time just two commands away
from running the actual code that you're trying to run
instead of going to read some kind of readme from a person on the internet
yeah and it's also pretty challenging for newcomers to programming exactly you're like
really i just want to run this i just yeah exactly i just want to run this you're like
but what am i doing all this terminal stuff like i just want to run i wrote the program i wanted to
go uh i feel like maybe that's part of why notebooks and that whole notebook jupiter
side of things is so popular because assuming somebody has created a server and got it started
for you, you don't worry about those things, right?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
So let's talk about kind of that beginner experience.
If you have an example on your website somewhere where it just shows if you just check out a
repository that's already been configured to use Pixie.
It's just clone Pixie run to run start or something like that.
You don't have to create the environments.
And even that could potentially happen without Python
even on the machine initially, right?
Yeah.
So a funny part of Pixie is Pixie itself is a Pixie project.
So if we want to build Pixie, it is a Rust project.
But we run Pixie run build in this case.
Pixie run install.
So you kind of move everything back into the tasks in Pixie
and you can run it using Pixie.
And Pixie will take care of your environment.
Yeah, so basically, as I also said before,
we're learning a lot, for example, from Cargo.
So we also have a single Pixie.toml file
that kind of defines all of your dependencies,
a bit of metadata about your project.
And then you can define these tasks.
And so like what we see on the screen is that we have a task that's called start.
And that just runs Python main.py.
So that's pretty straightforward.
But obviously, like you can go further, like you can have tasks that depend on other tasks.
And there we're learning a lot from, there's a project called taskfile.dev.
And we also want to integrate caching into these tasks so that if you,
So like one task might download something on your system,
like some assets that you need, like images and stuff.
And if you already have them cached,
then you don't need to redownload them
and these kinds of things.
So we're really like wanting to build
a simple but powerful task system in there.
And that benefits greatly
from having these dependencies available
because like in this case,
what we see on the screen,
we have the dependencies
and one of those is Python 3.11.
And that means the moment you run Pixie Run Start,
It will actually look at the log file and look at what you have in your local environment installed.
And the environments are always local to the project, which is also a difference to Konda and Mamba.
So it will look into that environment and check if Python 3.11 is there.
And if the version that you have in your environment corresponds to the one that's listed in the log file.
And if not, it will download the version and install it into your environment.
And make sure that you have all the stuff that's necessary or listed to run what you need.
Nice. So for example, you got in your example, Python 3.11.4, some flexibility there on the
very, very end. Does that download a binary version or does it build from source or what
happens when it needs that?
Yeah. So typically, like, Konda is a binary package manager. So usually what you download
is binary. We're working on the source dependency capabilities, where also Rackler Build, what I
mentioned before, is going to play a big role. Because the idea is that you can also run Pixie
Build at some point soon, and that will build you a Gonda package out of your Pixie project.
But we would use the same capabilities to basically also allow you to get local dependencies
and then build them ad hoc and put them into your environment.
Yeah, so I suppose it's pro-- Oh, go ahead, Ruben, sorry.
Yeah, so that comes back to the example you gave before with the problem that there's a
huge server debug or something, and you would want to use a version that's not
shared around the world yet. So you need this GitHub link and that package you need to install,
and that's something we still want to support
through this local or URL-based dependency.
But for that, we first need to be able to build it.
Yeah, kind of like the git plus on pip install.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
All right, I found out where this little section was here,
where this Pixie is made for collaboration on your announcement,
where it just says git clone some repo, Pixie run, start build, whatever.
yeah this maybe just talk through like what happens there because if I don't even have Python
much less a virtual environment much less the things installed you know if I try this at Python
if I they just say clone this go here Python run like if you don't have Python it'll just say
Python what is that if you do have Python it'll say you know FastAPI what is that right like
there's a lot of steps that this really simplifies and that's kind of what I was talking about with
the beginners as well?
Like, you know, maybe speak to what's happening here.
Yeah.
So when you do Pixie run, it will create, and you have nothing on your system, right?
Except for Pixie and that repository.
Then it's going to create a hidden folder inside of your project.
That's called.pixie.
And in there it will install all of these tools that are dependencies of the project.
So Python, NumPy, scikit-learn, whatever.
And then when you do a pixie run, it will invoke, actually, there's a thing called Dino
TaskShare, which we're using.
And that's basically something like it looks like bash, but it also works on Windows, which
is like the key feature here.
So that will sort of run the task.
And in this case, like some task is probably defined inside of the pixie tommel.
And that might run something like Python, I don't know, start Flask or start Jupyter,
or, you know, whatever the developer desires to do.
But yeah, like the cool thing is that it will, like in the background, activate the environment,
like the virtual environment and use it to run your software.
Okay.
Yeah, that's really cool.
And that, yeah, most of that kind of happens behind the scenes.
So also with Conda, for example, or Mamba, it's usually multiple steps.
So usually what you would do is you would do like Mamba create my environment.
And then that environment would have some name.
And then you would need to do Mamba activate my environment.
And then only you would be able to run stuff.
And what you're running is also probably going to look more complicated than just typing Pixie run some task, which does all of that.
Right.
The sum task is almost an alias for the actual run command, right?
Yes.
Yeah.
It could be something very complicated.
And it could also be multiple tasks that they actually run in the background
because they can depend on each other.
Excellent.
I really like that the virtual environment
or all the binary configuration stuff is a subdirectory of the project.
That's always bothered me about Conda.
You know, if I go, I've got, I think I have about 260 GitHub repos on my GitHub profile
and I check out other people's stuff and check it out.
And so if I go just to my file system and I go in there, I'm like, I haven't messed with
this for a year.
Was that on the old computers on my laptop?
Is on my mini?
Like what was that on?
I don't, so it could be, I haven't set it up or maybe I have.
Right.
And if I go there and I see there's a V and V folder or something along those lines, I'm
like, oh yeah, it might be out of date, but I definitely have done something with this here.
I probably can run it. Whereas the conda style, like you don't know. What did you name it? If you
have 200 of them, what is the right one? How do I activate it? And then also if something kind of
goes haywire, it's like, you know, I'm just going to RMRF that folder and it's out. Just recreated
on the new version of whatever. Right. But if it's somewhere else, you know, there's just like this
this disconnect. I know there's like a command flagged override or something to like get conda
to put it locally, but defaults are powerful, right? And I really like that it's like there,
and you can just blast away the.pixi and start over if you need to.
And we're also using the same tricks that Condor uses and a bunch of other package managers. So
like if you can have these multiple environments, but they actually share the underlying files.
So if you use the same Python 3.11 version in multiple environments, it's not, like, you don't duplicate those files, you don't lose a lot of storage, for example.
Oh, that's nice.
And the other thing that's really cool, and I mean, Konda also gives you that, but you can have completely different Python versions in all of these environments.
And it's very, like, straightforward to use.
Like, you don't need to, like, I don't know, run it through containers or stuff like that.
It's just, like, all in your system.
And, yeah, very nice.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Oops, let's see.
What else do I want to...
Yeah.
So one thing that I ran across here
that was pretty interesting
while just researching this
is you said
Pixie and Conda, like Nix,
are language agnostics.
And I'm like, what is this Nix thing?
And that brought me over to NixOS.
What is this?
um nix or yeah nix basically is a functional package manager okay so uh it works with a
functional programming language which is kind of an interesting idea and a lot of people that know
nix uh really love it so we would like for pixie to also be as loved as nix is by nix people
and basically what's nice about the functional programming language is that it kind of you know
from the input the output so you can cache the function execution and you know okay
like if the function didn't change and the inputs didn't change then the output is also not going
to change right you can cache the heck out of it you can paralyze it so much and so on yeah
And that's kind of what, like, that's how I understand Nix is that basically you have a function that you execute to, let's say, get bash on your system or get Python on your system.
And once you have executed that function for that specific Python version, you know that you have, you know, Python with that hash in your system somewhere.
And then Nix has some magic to kind of string things together so that you can also sort of do something like a Conda activate where it would put the right version of Python, NumPy and whatever you install through Nix onto your system path and make it usable.
And so I think Nix and Pixie are competitors in a way.
The thing about the functional language is that it also makes it like way less beginner friendly, at least kind of my opinion.
Yeah, I agree.
The way Pixie kind of works is like really straightforward in a way.
Like you just define your dependencies and ranges and stuff and you get the binaries.
With Nix, sometimes you need to like, usually you build things from source.
So that's also a difference.
I think they have like distributed caches that you could use and things like that.
But honestly, I'm not a user of Nix, so I'm not sure how widely these caches, like widely used these caches are.
But we definitely look at Nix as like also another source of like inspiration.
And I think they have something really good going for them because people that use Nix, they are like super evangelical about it.
Yeah.
Well, it also probably helps its functional programming, right?
People who do functional programming, they love functional programming.
The pureness of it is pretty nice.
And then NixOS also goes a step further,
where you can manage your entire configuration and everything through the same system.
And that's also pretty powerful.
And maybe we can find some interesting ways of supporting something similar.
But in a way, like, if you look at Pixie, I think we are trying to, like, we don't actually care so much about Konda in a way, or like, maybe that's also the wrong way to put it.
But basically what we're looking is also like, how does Docker do things?
And how does Nix do things?
And like, how can we kind of like learn from those tools?
And yeah, we have a pretty well-defined vision for ourselves.
And the main part is that we just want to make it easy to get started.
So you shouldn't have the hassle of learning a new thing to get started.
You should just know the bare minimum of information on how to run something.
And Pixie is there to help you.
Instead of we do something with a complete vision that's making it perfect,
and we're even doing it in a specific OS that you need to install,
we want this to be used on every OS,
and we want this to be used by everyone so you can share your code with.
anyone, anywhere.
Yeah.
The clone, sure, the clone
and then just pixie run.
That's pretty easy.
It's pretty easy for people to do, right?
I would say so.
Yeah.
So that's the experience
if someone's set up a project for you
on your announcement post,
you'll have a nice little example
of not a terribly complicated example
an app that you might or a project you set up but maybe just talk through like if if i want to start
with just maybe i have a GitHub repo already but i haven't said it like what's the process there
so you would uh if you already have a GitHub repository for example you would just do pixie
in it and then give it yeah basically you would just say dot because that's your current folder
or if you don't have anything you would just do something like pixie any my project
and that will create the my project folder for you with a pixie.toml file inside
and then once you have that you can do pixie add python and you can use like the specifiers from
gonda so you could do something like python python equals 3.11 and that would get you python 3.11
into the dependencies of that project and then when you and it also installed it at that point
and after it installs it creates that log file that you can also like should check into your
repository so that you know what the latest versions were that were like yeah yeah okay
like the pinned basically the pinned versions or constraints yeah basically yeah one other thing
that happens when you do pixie add is that it actually goes and tries to figure out like what's
the latest version that's available for that package and then already puts a pin into your
dependencies so what we see on the screen is like we do pixie add cowpy and then it adds cowpy 1.1.5.star
So that's a pretty specific version already.
Nice.
And you haven't done it here, but so the example is pixie run cowpy,
and then the parameter is hello blog reader,
and it does the cow saying hello blog reader.
But when you talked earlier about the tasks or whatever,
you could just say create a task called cow,
and it is python cowpy hello blog reader, right?
And that you would just say pixie run cow,
and the same thing would happen?
Do I got that all put together, right?
Yep, yep, yep, that's absolutely the case.
But basically, any binary executable that you have in your environment, like in this case, cowpy, you can also call with pixie run whatever.
So you can also do pixie run Python, and it would start Python 3.11 or whatever you have installed inside of that environment.
Okay, yeah, and that would actually do the REPL and everything?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, just like having it globally installed.
So one thing that does...
Yeah, sorry, go ahead.
Yeah. So one other feature of Pixie that we haven't mentioned before is that you can still do global installs.
So sometimes you have that comment line tool that you really love.
One of the things that I usually install is bat, which is like cat with wings.
And so what you can do with Pixie is you can do Pixie global install bat.
And that will install bat and make it globally available.
So you can run it from wherever. It's not tied to any like project environment.
It's just on your system in your home folder, essentially.
And you can just run that wherever you are, and it works.
Yeah.
The one that comes to mind for me a lot is PipX.
That's exactly where we got this kind of using similar mechanisms to that.
So every tool that you install this way is installed into its own virtual environment,
so they don't have any overlap.
But you can install versions that are completely unrelated.
Right.
Even different pythons, right?
Yeah.
Hey, Wolf, I think you might be a little farther away from your mic than you were before.
Oh, sorry.
Yeah, no worries.
It just changes the volume a little.
Sorry.
One thing that I also like a lot about this, and pour one out for poor old PEP something,
something, something about the Dunder pie packages folder.
I can't remember what the PEP number is,
but basically the idea that if I'm just in the right place,
the run command should grab whatever local environment is the one I've set up
rather than explicitly go and find the environment,
activating the environment, et cetera.
So it looks like when you say pixie run,
there's no pixie activate or any of those things, right?
How's that work?
Yeah.
So, like, the way condo environments work is that you need to have some sort of, like, little activation thing where basically the past variable, environment variables changed and adjusted.
And some other activation scripts are run.
And with Pixie, what we're doing is we run those in the background and then we extract all the environment variables that are necessary for the activation basically to work.
And then we just inject it right before we execute what you want to execute, like CalPy in this case.
Yeah, so there's like an implicit activate, or you don't even have to say activate in Python.
If you just use that Python, you say the path to the virtual environment Python run, that's sufficient.
Yeah, that's more or less what happens.
And sometimes packages can have different requirements
when it comes to activation.
So Python doesn't have many requirements
But some other packages, they might
need some other environment variables
that are specific to the environment location
where they are installed, et cetera.
Sure.
Well, even Python virtual environments
can get weird where you can set environment variables that
get set during the activation of the virtual environment.
I don't think many people do that because it's transient,
but it could.
We also have a pixie shell command.
So if you want to have that experience
of an activated environment, you can use pixie shell.
And then it is basically a shell that acts
like an activated environment.
Poetry has the same.
Yeah, sure.
Now, the example here shows I'm in the top level of the project
and I say pixie run.
What if I'm three directories down and I say pixie run?
What happens then?
Yeah, then the exact same thing will happen
because Pixie runs from the root of the project
and all your tasks are by default running from the root of the project.
So you define them with the path in your project as they are always.
And then where you are, you can run those tasks as they are.
But if you want to run something in that directory,
you can just use Pixie run and then your own commands to...
and acts on that directory.
There's this other way of using it,
like the Pixie itself will run down the path that you're in
and will find the first Pixie project that it encounters.
And for instance, Pixie itself has some examples.
So if you move into the examples directory
and then in one of the examples,
those are their own Pixie project.
So if you run it there, Pixie run start,
it will start the example instead of the--
- Interesting.
So you could have a nested one, like there's a main one,
but then inside you could have little sub pixie projects?
Yeah, a little bit like Node and npm in that regard.
Yeah.
We have an issue that's open about mono repo support.
Yeah, so I was going to say, this sounds like--
yeah, this sounds like a really good idea for mono repo support.
Yeah.
There is a different problem that you normally with mono repos
have some shared dependencies.
So if you, for instance, have in your root of your repository,
you have Python dependency defined,
then you want that shared between all the packages down
in your repo tree.
So that's something we still have to support.
So right now, there are actual separate projects.
And the Pixie tool will just find the first projects
counters, but we need some kind of way to define a workspace or monorepo, if you would say
it like that.
And then you could link those environments together.
And if you start a lower level one, you would start the main one with it or something like
that.
Got it.
Or look at the dependencies of the top one, and then you might add some more in your little
sub project type of thing, something like that.
Well, even what you already have sounds pretty excellent for you.
Yeah.
So currently if you have like a system where you have a backend server that's completely
Python or Rust or whatever, you could have that as a separate project and then have another
project that is like the front end.
So you do some, you install npm there or whatever.
And those are completely separate within your repository.
the main repository is just some tooling to, for instance,
limit everything or something like that,
or install your base dependencies that you want to use
in the complete repository.
But you could already split it up pretty nicely.
Yeah.
Well, I'm sure if you have a truly large organization
with the monorepo, which for people who don't know,
that just means like all the code for the whole organization is in one huge repository instead
of a bunch of projects with dependencies across projects it's just within that kind of that file
structure like it's a lot i was complaining about having a dependency that had two things that wanted
the same library both lower than and greater than some version number like that's for one project
you know i mean you put it all together it's only going to get more challenging so tools like this
sub-projects and stuff I think could help
go like, alright, this part needs these things
because that's the data science part.
This other part needs that thing because that's the
microservice part.
Yeah, exactly.
Nice.
So what else should people
know about Pixie?
Taking
PRs
and contributions?
Definitely.
like uh we're also still like pretty early so we love people that test pixie and tell us the
feedback on like our discord channel or on like GitHub i think we have discussions open as well
and issues um any feedback is appreciated uh and we're really like trying to take package management
to the next level that includes like building packages that includes like package signing
stuff like this, security, etc.
There are so many things and issues to work on.
And I think it's going to be very fun.
Yeah.
I'm also actually organizing PackagingCon.
Okay.
That's happening in like a week from now, actually.
And really looking forward to that.
So that's going to be fun to chat with a lot of other.
Does it have an online component?
Yeah, virtual.
So it's in Berlin, but it's also hybrid.
So you can join virtually if you want.
Will the videos be on something like YouTube later?
Yep.
For sure.
Okay, cool.
If the timing lines up, you'll have to give me the link to the videos and I'll put it
into the show notes for people.
We might somehow miss the conference runs, but the videos aren't yet up.
But if they are, send me a link and we'll make it part of the show so people can check
it out.
And one of prefix bus will also talk about this,
these rust crates that we've been building and how,
how it all fits together.
If you want to learn more about that and if you want to contribute,
like also if you want to learn rust,
like we're more than happy to kind of like help you,
like guide you as time permits, obviously, but we,
we're trying to be really active on our, on our channels.
So on GitHub, we have some good first issues.
And if you have some questions, just ask around.
And in our Discord, we're very active
and really try to react as fast as possible to anything.
Right at the bottom of prefix.dev,
you've got your little Discord icon down there.
So people can click on that to kind of be part of it, right?
I think it's also--
Yeah.
It's literally around.
Yeah, I see you all both are like me
and have like decided not accepted that X Twitter
is called X.
- Yeah.
- I'm not changing the mind.
- They should come out with the final logo, right?
Like that can't be it.
- I can't be it.
It's like a child drew it.
Like I'm just, this is what I got and it's there.
Maybe I need, I should probably put an EX Twitter in there
just for, yeah.
And then a quick question from Elliot.
Any meaning behind the name Pixie?
We thought very long about the name.
We had a bunch of different versions.
Like initially, we thought PX, just P and X.
But--
Have you considered X?
I think you can just use that for whatever.
Just kidding.
Sorry.
Back to Twitter for a second.
That name is Burnt.
It is Burnt.
We also thought about packs like P-A-X, but that's apparently executable that you already have on your system if you're using Linux or Mac.
So that didn't work because tap completion is broken and all of that.
We thought about P-E-X.
I don't know.
We wanted to derive it a little bit from the name prefix because that's kind of the company name.
But Pixie seemed really cool because it's apparently a magical fairy.
Yeah.
We make a package management magic.
Yeah, exactly.
I think the name is great.
It's short enough to type.
It's pretty unique.
It's somewhat Google-able, right?
Yeah.
And you can pronounce it.
That was also important to it.
Yeah.
You don't have to debate, is it PiPi or is it PiPi?
Like, make it lowercase.
It's not an acronym.
You don't say the letters.
And before, we created this thing called Micromamba, which I don't want to go into too much detail,
but a lot of people complained about Micromamba being too long to type.
So we had to stay under the five-character limit.
Yeah, I think there's value in that.
There's definitely value in that.
So let's close out our conversation with where you all are headed.
What's next?
Yeah, we are super excited about a bunch of upcoming features.
One is definitely what I already mentioned, Pixie Builds, so that you can build packages
right away from Pixie.
To prepare them for Conda Forge, right?
Well, for Conda Forge or maybe you also have some internal stuff or your own private things
and stuff.
And we just want to make that easy because that is currently way too hard to make a Conda
package is like a bunch of steps um and that also kind of precludes that you could use source and
get dependencies for like other pixie projects because basically what we do what we will do in
the background is like if you depend on a source dependency for another pixie project we will build
it into a like package on the fly and then put it into your environment um and then like integrating
with the PyPI ecosystem.
That's what we're actually working on the most right now.
And that is the RIP thing that I told you about.
Yeah, that's awesome.
Because we just see a lot of need in the community
to have this.
A lot of projects in the wild are kind of mixing it.
Yeah, if you get it working with PyPI,
I will switch my stuff over and give it a try and see how it works.
That would be great.
Until then, I can't.
I've just got hundreds of packages, and a lot of them,
I'm sure are just unique to PyPI.
Yeah.
So we are not far away.
Like I think the hard bits are solved
and that was like resolving
because it works quite different from Conda.
You need to like get the individual wheel files
to get the metadata, et cetera.
And like that doesn't scale
if you need all the metadata upfront,
which is actually the case in Conda.
You have all the metadata upfront,
but with PyPI you don't.
And so we had to make the solver lazy.
We had to make the solve generic and we are through that process now.
And now it's basically just engineering work in that sense to integrate it with Pixie.
But it's going to happen and it's going to be nice, I'm sure.
Yeah, we also have some ideas of like, can we somehow merge Pixie Toml into PyProject Toml
so that it's like more natural to like Python developers and you only need to manage one file.
And I think PyProjectMill gives us the flexibility that we would need to do that.
I think it does.
You've got things like Hatch and others that kind of got a way to go in there.
Yeah.
And then we have some other ideas that are a bit more out there maybe, or not really.
But we already have a setup Pixie Action for GitHub.
That's really nice.
And then another idea is how can you go from a virtual environment to a Docker image easily?
so that's also something that we're thinking about
these kind of things
yeah all very exciting
awesome
how long has this been around
your blog post is two months old
announcing this stuff
yeah I mean I think
we maybe made the repository public
a month earlier than the blog post
or so but
it like prefix
as a company is like
just very little over a year old
And that's when we really started to build the website, the platform, Pixie, Rattler, and all of these things.
So I think Pixie we started maybe like five months ago.
So not too old.
Still very fresh.
Yeah.
It still has that new software smell.
Exactly.
Definitely.
I hope we don't get the...
Yeah.
The old and boldy smell.
You don't want that.
But still, like, personally, I'm very surprised how stable it is already.
And I think that's partly due to the use of Rust and the fact that we can very heavily
check some of the inner workings of the tool before we ship it.
Yeah.
Well, it looks like it's off to a really good start.
I like a lot of the ideas here.
So, yeah, keep up the good work.
Before we wrap it up, we're basically out of time.
But, you know, there's always the open source dream of I'm going to build a project.
It's going to get super popular.
The dream used to be I'm going to do some consulting around it, right?
I've created Project X.
Project X is popular so I can charge high consulting rates.
That's the dream of the 90s.
I think the new dream is I'm going to start a company around my project
and have some kind of open core model
and something interesting there.
You guys have prefix.dev.
What's the dream for you?
How are you approaching this?
I think a ton of people would be interested
to just hear how did you make that happen?
So you saved the hardest question for last.
You don't have to answer it,
but I do think it's interesting.
I think package management is a hard problem.
And there are lots of sort of sub-problems that I would say enterprise customers in a way are willing to pay for.
That includes like security, like managed repositories, let's say, like basically RedHeads.
And like more or less RedHeads product is that they have this like, I don't know, five or ten years or something like of support.
for like old versions of packages for enterprise customers.
And I think we have a pretty interesting approach
to package management that is pretty easy to kind of grasp.
And like part of why we want to make Pixie Build a thing
is also because we want people to make more packages
and then upload them to our website
and kind of grow this entire thing in popularity
and make it super useful
so that we hopefully end up with customers
that are supporting our work.
Awesome.
Well, good luck to both of you,
and thanks for being on the show to share what you're up to.
Sure.
Thank you.
Yep. Bye, y'all.
Bye-bye.